Piloted and revised Foundational HPC course (#187)
UNIVERSE-HPC/course-material: high_performance_computing/computer_simulations/02_weather_simulations.md

To give you a better picture, to represent a feature within a model you need at least 4 points attributed to it. In other words, the grid needs to be 1/4 of the size of the modelled feature. Now imagine, you want to simulate a weather phenomenon of the size 4 km x 4 km, a thunderstorm maybe? To do that, you need to use a model with a 1 km grid resolution, but most of the models are coarser than that.

Generally, decreasing the spacing between grid points is not easy, not only because the computational intensity scales to the square of the spacing (for each direction) but also because of the need to maintain the numerical stability of the equations used to simulate the atmospheric variables.

Numerical stability refers to the behaviour of the equations solved with erroneous input - in a numerically unstable algorithm a small error in the input causes a larger error in the results. Therefore, increasing the resolution of the grid may require the equations to be rewritten to maintain their numerical stability. Generally, the higher the resolution (smaller grid spacing) the shorter the time step that is needed to maintain stability.

### Observational Data

> Another bottleneck is related to the observational data. The atmosphere is a chaotic system - without substantial amounts of data the chances of creating accurate forecasts decrease significantly, especially for increased forecast range. That is why the weather forecasting relies on the observational data coming from many different sources, both terrestrial and space based. It has to be noted that they describe the atmosphere in a slightly different way and so there is no unique way to represent the data uniformly. However, it’s absolutely crucial to have as many different sources as possible, otherwise the forecasts will only be able to capture large scale patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another bottleneck is related to the observational data. The atmosphere is a chaotic system - without substantial amounts of data the chances of creating accurate forecasts decrease significantly, especially for increased forecast range. That is why the weather forecasting relies on the observational data coming from many different sources, both terrestrial and space based. It has to be noted that they describe the atmosphere in a slightly different way and so there is no unique way to represent the data uniformly, this makes calibrating and pre-processing the data to be used as input to the simulations an ongoing challenge.
Despite the difficulty of utilising these disparate data sources, it’s absolutely crucial to have as many different sources as possible, otherwise the forecasts will only be able to capture large scale patterns.
```
